Today's date is July 17th, July 18th, July 19th,
testing, testing, this is a test, this is a test,
testing, testing, by getting some back... That
we'll have to live with. Yeah, that's fine. Oh,
wait a minute. Today is July 18th, 1985. I'm
talking to Officer Teal. What's your first name?
John. John Teel, T-E-E-L, about who is an officer
on the UC police force. And I want to start off by
talking a little bit about your background. Where
and when were you born? When did you start with a
police force? JOHN TEEL, I was born in Kansas. I'm
57 years old. I've been here in California since I
was 9. I have been here on the campus since 1959.
Okay. So could you tell me a little bit about the
training and the police force in 1959 and how it's
changed since today? In 1959, they gave you a gun, a
flashlight, and a map, and keys to the building,
and said, go out there and do it. And they didn't
give you any formalized training? None. None?
None. How about today? Today it's so formalized
that it is almost bordering on
FBI standards, I would say. Really? And where did
UC get these standards? I mean, where did they
derive them from? Well, all the police
departments within the state of California
belong to the police officer standard of training
post. They all have a school. We have schools that
are 16 weeks old, or long. 16 weeks long, yeah. And
after they go through a rigorous program on
self-defense,
how to subdue people without hurting them, the use
of your nightstick, the use of radios, traffic
laws, rules, regulations, then they come back
here. to us after 16 weeks in training. And they are
put with a training officer for another 16 weeks.
Like a senior officer on the force? A senior
officer on the force or an officer that has been No,
it has to be an officer that's been to the officer's
training school with four training rookies. And
that's 16 weeks, and after 16 weeks, he's then
evaluated and either let go or retained. Now, why
did this formalization, why did this school,
rules and regulations, why did it come about?
Well, it was just one of the things it had to be.
Prior to POST, every department had their own
little thing going. Yeah. Oakland has its own
police academy, which is probably one of the best
in California or the United States. San Francisco
has another one. Los Angeles has their own. The
smaller departments can't afford them. Sure. So
they go to various places. We have one out in Near
Antioch, we have another one in Chico and one in
Sacramento. Sometimes we use the Highway Patrol
Academy.
And that's it. And did it have anything to do with
the riots in the 1960s, do you think? Probably had
everything to do with it. Could you explain that?
We didn't even have radios at the time. The larger
departments did. We had maybe four radios. When
the riots broke out, we had 28 officers. What's the
size of the force today? Oh, it's only 65, but we
went to 108. My goodness, that's good
information. Okay, when were you at 108? During
the peak of the riots. I'd say, what, up to 19...
Naples Park, 1969, something like that. Yeah.
Okay. Oh, okay. Now, how about... The emphasis,
has the emphasis as far as training officers
changed? I don't understand the question. Has,
has, well, obviously the type of training has
changed, but I mean the emphasis on the type of
tactics that you'd use in certain situations or
the type of people that you'd recruit. Oh, well,
the recruitment is still a high school education,
clear background. and physical agility test,
psychological test. Then they go in for, it's not
so much, it's still self-defense for yourself in
any situation, but you're taught how to take
somebody down without hurting them.
It's becoming more of a, almost a verbal
confrontation now instead of the old times you
used to get in an argument real quick, and it was
knocked down and dragged out. Not to that effect,
but it's that opposed from what we were doing as
what we're doing now. Where the victim is, we're
taught that the victim still has lots of rights and
needs to be treated with respect, and that's it.
And when about, do you remember when these rules
and regulations first started? I'm trying to
remember back, probably 60... No, let's see. We
instituted our own police academy. I don't
remember what year it was. Here on our own campus,
we had people come to it from Berkeley, Albany, Rad
Lab. And while we were there attending our school
up at the football stadium, in the press box, they
blew up the electrical
transmission line up
Centennial Road. Oh, okay. And I think that was in
67?
I'm not sure of the date. Yeah, I can check that out.
Yeah. And then it was after that. Was it after that
that they decided to? No, that's when they started
it. Okay. Okay. They started to get a more
formalized training? More formalized training.
That's also, we had a new chief. Oh, okay, so...
Chief Beal. Okay, who was the old chief? Woodward
was the old chief. Woodward? He was an old-timer.
He was a good man. He thought and... Do you remember
his first name? Frank Woodward. Okay. And he was a
wonderful person. And... He was in law
enforcement his whole life, but his law
enforcement was an entirely different phase than
we have to accept today. Chief Beale came. He was
a... What's his first name? William. Okay. He came
to us from Berkeley. He retired from Berkeley,
police department. But he had been to the FBI
academies. He had been to, my God, I don't know. He
had his Ph.D. in a... In criminology, he did? Oh,
yeah. And the dissidents always claimed that
Chief Beale did not have to carry a gun. He was armed
with words at least four inches long.
We would have followed him into a fire. That's what
we thought of him.
And so it was his idea, along with the general
campus unrest and this particular blowing up some
power lines, Well, the power lines had nothing to
do with it. That was just a year that I remember that
we were in school. Oh, okay. But it was his idea to
formalize the police training? Yes. And his,
actually, it was his starting it that we were up at
our own academy. He had started that even then. Oh,
okay. What other changes did he decide to bring
about? Jurisdictional changes. With Berkeley,
we would take care of our own property no matter
where it's located. We'd have full control of it,
working towards. Well, how was it before that? The
only thing, we had a golden ring, so to speak,
around the university. You didn't step across
that ring. Yeah. OK. And that ring was like the
border of the university? That was the border of
the university. Hearst, Bancroft, Piedmont, and
Oxford. OK, and the outlining areas that the
university owned, like the People's Park area.
The People's Park. The Berkeley police would take
care of that before? We always had that. We had that
all the time. Because that was right here. It was
when they started bringing the dormitories in,
lying off campus. We have property out in Albany
now, Living Students Group. We have the Richmond
Field Station. Oh, God, we've got people
everywhere. I mean, property everywhere. And
that's probably one reason for an increasing
number of police on the force. No, that had nothing
to do with the force. The reason they increased the
force is because we needed them for bodies for
protecting the university campus during the
riots. Okay,
okay. Any other changes that Beale brought about?
No, there's so many different things that he'd
done. that he's almost,
it's hard to say what he didn't do. It's easier to
say that he didn't do this than it would be to tell
you what he did do. Okay, then how did the
relationships with the student radicals change
once he came in? They're still radical. Yeah. I
mean, there was no change in them except you'd... I
mean, the relationship between the police and the
student radicals. I don't think there was any
change. They still think the way they do. And we
listen to them more than we used to. Maybe that's a
change, a good change.
We, in turn, really don't have a heck of a lot to do
with them, because that all was handed through the
chancellor's office, or supposed to be. OK, let's
talk a little bit about the first riot or
confrontation that you were in. Was that the free
speech movement in 64? Didn't we have one prior to
that? No, that was the first major one. That was the
first one, yeah. That was the first major one in the
fall of 1964. And that started all over a
four-letter word that was posted at Van Croft and
Telegraph. A guy was holding the sign up. Oh, that
was the filthy speech. That came in. It's the same
thing. Same thing. Okay, okay. And it started from
there to where now they have Sproul Plaza, which is
a free speech area. Almost anything goes. It's
hard for anyone to be insulted on Sproul Plaza. I
believe the courts has found that people can walk
away from it if they don't like it. Well, when did
that come about, where they made it a free speech
plaza? That's when it started. Oh, okay, okay. And
gradually it just worked up, even up until today,
you know. Yeah, right. And I've, you know,
everyone's been out there before, and
occasionally, you know, someone will insult
police officers. How do you deal with that? I'm not
even going to talk to you about it. Oh, okay. Okay.
What was your job? What were your
responsibilities back about 1964 and 65 during
the free speech movement? PATROLLING,
TRYING TO TAKE THE PARK BACK. GENERAL, JUST
GENERAL POLICE WORK. OKAY. AND WERE YOU INVOLVED
THEN WITH THE PEOPLE'S PARK? OH, SURE. OKAY. COULD
YOU TELL ME ABOUT THAT? IT WAS VERY SIMPLE. WE TOOK
IT AWAY FROM THEM, AND THEY TOOK IT AWAY FROM US.
FINALLY, THEY GAVE IT UP, AND WE GOT IT BACK, ONLY
THEY NOW CONTROL IT. NOW, YOU FIGURE THAT ONE OUT.
what does that do to morale on the police force it's
the shits
and uh who would you who would you or where would you
play not who but where would you place a
responsibility i'm not placing responsibility
anywhere that's not my job oh okay can you tell me
about the uh cooperation uh between the Berkeley
police, the National Guard, and UC police?
Totally 100% cooperation. Okay, well, can you
tell me about the dynamics? I mean, who is in
charge, and how do you deal when you have three
separate forces like that? We had five, six, we
probably had 20 different forces. We had highway
patrol, city police, army, highway patrol. At
that time, the sheriff's is the person that takes
over okay okay so the sheriff's in charge of the
chain of command at that time it's automatically
his because it's in his county and that's
california law it's california law you know i'd be
that's kind of surprising because i would have
thought that probably the national guard general
would have taken over uh because he's a direct line
to the governor we were telling the national guard
general what to do i had a I don't know, a lieutenant
colonel or a colonel or something. And we were
standing at University House. And here comes a
couple of thousand demonstrators, and he'd run
over to me, my God, officer, what are we going to do?
I said, stand up. And we did, and he didn't know what
to do. But that's National Guard. I mean, that's
not their primary purpose is not keeping order.
Yeah, exactly. They were quartered in People's
Park. We had a fence around it. And a number of the
dissidents got together and they sent some very
beautiful young ladies down to the park and gave
them cookies. It turned out that they were laced
with LSD and marijuana. So we don't take cookies
from strange people.
Tell me some of the other tactics that were used
against you. Yesterday you said that there were
real long slingshots. Could you tell me some of the
weapons and tactics that were used? Well, they had
long surgical tube slingshots for throwing
rocks, and if they got a hold of one of our grenades
that still was going, they'd throw it back at us.
Tear gas grenades? Tear gas grenades. They
used...
mirrors to burn out the bulb in our TV cameras so we
couldn't take pictures. They used laser beams, I
guess, to the same effect.
Rocks was their main object. Also, we were
standing at Bancroft and Telegraph inside Sprout
Plaza. And all of there was about, oh, 75 of us. They
were making a march, and they were going down
Bancroft. Well, we were not going to let them on
campus. So out of the crowd came two Molotov
cocktails and caught two highway patrolmen. And
it's pretty horrible to see something like that
happen. I can see why the guys in Nam might go nuts.
They've seen it every day. What happened to these
two officers? I have no idea.
They weren't there long enough to be friends, and
they were only comrades.
Tell me about when you're in a confrontation like
that, tell me about, and you see people marching on
you, tell me about the feeling in the police line.
Well, you have a great feeling of comradery. Your
morale is high. You're doing something. You're
working together. You treat each other closer
than a fellow employee. You're almost like a
brother. You're protecting his back. He's
protecting yours. Real good feeling. And that is
stressed in our training also. And
our morale now is built up. We have a lag. During
idle times, morale goes down. In busy times,
morale is up. And our present administration is
busy on building the morale, taking a positive
view,
trying not to start rumors. I mean, there's so many
things that can lower morale. Right, right,
exactly. And we're, as a whole unit, trying to
combat it. But we're not the only ones who start
rumors. The bad guys start them, too. Sure, sure.
Absolutely. Now, let's, you know, you've been out
there for a number of years, and, of course, during
the 60s, you listened to probably a lot of the
left-wing rhetoric. In the police force, did you
men ever sit down and discuss any of the things that
they were saying? Oh, sure. I mean, we had to. What
the hell? We were human. I mean, you stand out there
listening to them, you can't... They had some good
ideas and they had some poor ideas. They just had
more of the poor than they did good. But what did you
feel were the good and what did you feel were the
poor ideas? Well, they wanted to build up a unity
within the university, which is fine. But on the
same token, they kept tearing it down. They
really, at that time, didn't know what they
wanted. They were being led, we felt, by people
other than students. We still feel that way. And
who are these people? Call them what you want.
Reds, communists,
people that don't like universities. I don't
know. I'd be a damn fool to put my foot in that one.
Okay.
Obviously, behavior toward demonstrations must
have changed over the years. In what way? In the
type of tactics that you would use. Well, sure. We
used to wait for them. I mean, we used to go into them
and charge. Now we wait for them. And I don't know if
it's better or not. And how about the tactic? And
how about, for example, this new apartheid
movement? How have you responded? What are the
differences in the ways that you respond to that?
Well, they haven't as yet destroyed property.
Right. They're, I'd say, 60% non-students.
Yeah. If that many is students, 40%.
They were blocking... passageways, the court
seemed to, in Berkeley, find that they weren't
guilty. Come what may.
Now, I've read over at the Bancroft Library, I've
read some American Civil Liberty Union
literature on police brutality, especially
during, of course, the People's Park in 1969 and
the curfew and all of that. How would you respond to
that? Well, I guess Molotov cocktails are not
brutality.
So in other words, your response would be you were
just responding to force. You use reasonable
force to overcome reasonable force.
Let's talk a little bit about the movement. I saw
some other flyers which dealt with disarming the
police. There was an attempt, especially in
Berkeley, to disarm them. Was there an attempt
like that on campus? There has been attempts like
that over the years. The world is full of
dissidents, and they all come to Berkeley. Well,
what's the police force opinion on that? We don't
want to lose our guns. I mean, you use your gun, you
lose your gun, you lose your authority, a lot of it.
I mean, even from Wyatt Earp. Yeah.
Because we've got little guys, too, you know, and
women of small stature that... Without the
outward appearance of authority, they'd be hard
pressed to take care of themselves. That's how I
feel. I don't. Well, that's fine. That's all I
want. How about the relationship with the Board of
Regents and the UC police? We have nothing to do
with the Regents. We protect them. They're the
bosses. Yeah. But just like you, I suppose you
don't know the president of the university at
Texas, do you, personally? Yeah, I know. You know?
Yeah, but it's unusual, but usually I don't. Yeah,
same thing. Yeah. We know who they are, and we know
they're their bosses. Yeah, yeah. And they've
been good to us overall. Mm-hmm. They just gave us a
new retirement package. Oh, nice.
Is it a good one compared to... Oh, it's much better
than we had. Oh, good. The basic rule is people can
work at the university, I think, until they're 70
or 72. You're no damn good out on the street if
you're 70 or 72 as a cop. They've dropped it down to
where you can retire at age 50. Oh, wow. And then you
get some sort of a retirement? Oh, yeah. And at age
55, you get 2.5%. That's 2.5 times a year you've
got. So you can get up to 80% of your salary, which is
not bad at all. At 55, that's real nice. Yeah, if
you've got 30 years in. How many years? 57? You'll
have 30 years coming? I got 34 in. I had prior
service. Oh, I see. Great. Let's talk a little bit
about Governor Reagan. He's my hero. Did the
spirit go up in the force with his tough stance
toward dissidents during the 1960s after he was
elected? Whoever was governor would have had to
take in the same stance, I'm sure. You can't stand
by and see property destroyed, especially as
considered state property, even though it is not.
It does belong to the regents, even though we do get
a lot of money from the state. Well, why do you say it
is your hero, then? No, I just like it. Oh, okay.
Okay, let's talk a little bit about what were you?
What was your job and your responsibilities then
during People's Park? I started out, I was with the
detective division, and we went down and drove
stakes that says, keep off, keep out, the park is
off limits, blah, blah, blah. And as we put them in
the ground, there was people behind us pulling
them out. It went from there downhill. We put a
fence around it. They tore it down and tore up the
parking lot. By hand. Not with picks and shovels,
but by hand. There was some asphalt there, wasn't
there? Oh, yes. There was a lot of asphalt. And
prior to that, prior to the park, there was a
business area there. A small business area and
some one-level living groups. We went in and tore
everything down, getting ready to... I think they
were probably going to build student housing
there at that time. And that just happened to be a
rallying point for the dissidents to go to.
Otherwise, they'd have placed no, I don't think,
any significance at all on it. It just was a good...
Spot to go to and a good focus. And it got
everybody's attention. It's an open space,
parks, trees, babies, dogs.
And then did you help do any of the construction as
far as the fence was concerned? No. All we did was
guard it. We guarded the people that were putting
it in. What about the fact, were you on the scene
when the one character was shot and killed and the
other one was blind? I was working that day and he
was a wanted felon out of another city and had been
here for three days. And he was on a roof and he was
getting ready to throw a piece of concrete
approximately six inches square with steel
sticking out of it into a crowd of policemen.
Regardless of what you heard. No, I mean, I've just
read a number of reports, and they all conflict. I
know. That's why I wanted your view. I know. It's
really hard to get the answer. But very few people
want to hear our side of the view. Well, that's why I
want it. And so he was standing up on top of which
building? Some, I don't know which one it was, down
here on Telly. Oh, it was on Telegraph. Yeah. I
thought he was right over by the... Oh, okay, so
he's probably about... Not over a block away.
Yeah, okay, about a block away. He was not on
campus. Yeah. Period. Was he shot by UC or
Berkeley? No, I don't know who he was shot by. What
about the fellow that was blinded?
I thought he was blinded in the park. When was this?
What are you talking about? This was during the
riots? Yeah, it was about the same day, I think. No.
The reports I read was someone was shot with a
shotgun or something. Oh, there was a number of
people shot, but I don't believe that there was
anybody blinded. I might be in error, but I don't
remember
it. I
have another question, and that deals with just
types of force that could be used. That is, was
there any debate on using things like rubber
bullets that you hear about a lot today? No, that's
good today. But if you didn't have them, you didn't
hear about them. Yeah, when did they come in? I have
no idea. We still haven't got them. Oh, you don't?
No. Do you know how effective they are as far as? I
have no idea. When did you start using shields,
plexiglass shields? On your helmets?
Mm-hmm. First of all, I'm darned if I ever can
remember, probably 65. Yeah,
probably 65. I know maybe two years either way.
Yeah. You don't think of these things. I mean, as to
be remembered, you're just thankful to God you got
them. And at that time, right around 65, 67, did
other types of equipment come in common use that
you hadn't used before? Not that we hadn't used,
no. I mean, we'd always had our batons. I mean,
looking back, we've always had our helmets, gas
masks. We didn't get them until... After we'd all
got severely gassed two or three times. No,
not really. No protective clothing that would be
of any value to this interview. What about no
different types of boots or anything like that?
No, no. Not like steel reinforced to protect your
feet or anything like that? No. What about those
big plexiglass shields that I've seen in
pictures? We don't have such a thing. Oh, why not?
Because I've seen those. You've seen them in
Japan, China, but not in Berkeley.
Why not? You don't know. They're too cumbersome.
We had a different kind of infighting. And we had to
use physical force where it looks like to me when
they use the shields, why they're using water
cannons and stuff like that over there. Yeah.
Might be the good thing. Yeah, and they're real
close, and maybe they're just pushing the crowds
back. Correct. Yeah. Maybe they have more respect
for the police over there than they do over here.
Let's talk about that for a minute. Do you think
that, well, during the 1950s, it seems to me as a
historian that there was an awful lot of respect
for the police, and, of course, that shifted
dramatically in the 1960s. And it's changing
again today. Okay. How do you think it's changing
today? It's changing where more people have more
respect for the police, but it's up to the police to
show something going so they can be respected for
it. We have to earn it. It's not given to us. What
about organizations like organizations which
would put out bumper stickers, support your local
police and stuff? Did you get a lot of help from...
You remember those bumper stickers. I got one
probably in my memorabilia somewhere. Did you
ever get any help from that type of organization?
No. More... I guess moral support through people
reading it, maybe. I don't know. But it physically
didn't do us any good. And they didn't raise money?
Not for us, they did not, no. That's kind of
interesting because they bought, you know,
large, well, they handed out thousands of these
bumper stickers and then they bought billboards
and put things like that up. Remember that
billboard? Yeah. that had that little kid and it
said on top, some call him pig.
But that was their limit of their help then to UC
police. I don't know what they did anywhere else,
but here they didn't do nothing for us. We didn't
ask for any help. I doubt if we would have taken it.
Right, yeah. It might have been a conflict of
interest. Yeah. That's interesting.
Well, let's talk a little bit about the
whole idea of residency. I read about 1971 and 72
newspapers and flyers dealing with the Berkeley
police in which they wanted the Berkeley police,
they did some sort of survey and found that 85% of
them didn't live in Berkeley and this and that and
they wanted all of the police in Berkeley to be
residents of the city and they wanted more more
community control, they called it, of police. Did
those residency changes, or did those changes
down in Berkeley have any impact on the UC police?
How could they? Well, I mean, would they... We have
no room on campus to build houses. No, I don't mean,
I mean as far as Berkeley. We could care less what
Berkeley does. But I mean as far as where you're a
resident. We have no resident regulations.
We still have two or three people who live in
Berkeley.
You'd have to live in Berkeley to see the
conditions to live here, so maybe that has
something to do with it. Maybe it's good, maybe
it's bad. I don't know. Did regulations as far as
hiring change? As far as residency? No. Well, I
can't answer for work. I'm only saying here. I
know, I know. Okay, it did not apply to us in any way.
Yeah, okay. Okay, how about as far as your
recruitment is concerned? Does not apply. Not
their recruitment, I'm talking about. Our
recruitment has nothing to do with anything about
residency. Okay. I suppose they can't live in
Alaska. It's probably too far to commute. I know,
okay. You're getting off the whole balance. Like I
said, we had nothing to do. with Berkeley's
residency ordinance. OK. Now, how about as far as
your just basic recruitment? How has that changed
as far as equal affirmative action, equal
opportunity? We've always had it. Oh, really? You
mean even when you started in the 50s? Sure. And so
the proportion of women or minorities hasn't
increased? We had no women. We had no women
applying. That is interesting. And we now have, I
don't know what you call minorities. I suppose
you're talking about, what are you talking about
as minorities? Blacks and Hispanics. We've got
blacks, Hispanics. We've got black, Hispanic
men. We've got black and Hispanic women. We have
Asians.
We had a part Indian. I guess we still got one of them
or two. I don't know. But in other words, Berkeley
Police Force has always been open to that. No. I
don't have anything to do with Berkeley. Let's
forget Berkeley. I mean, UC. I mean, I'm at UC.
Yeah. UC has always been an open application
police department. That is interesting. Well,
why is that? Because Berkeley hasn't, nor had
Oakland. Oakland, I can't speak for. I can
remember when I came to work here, there was blacks
on the Berkeley Police Department. But not the
proportion that there is today. No, no. That's
really interesting. Well, I'm about done. Okay.
Oh, when do you feel that you're going to retire? As
soon as I feel like it. He's been a hard guy all
along. He's been a hard guy? Yeah. Oh, come on. He
keeps thinking we're Berkeley. No, no, no, I'm
just getting terms mixed up. But you think that
there isn't going to be a mandatory term for you?
Sure, if I wanted to stay until I'm 70, but I don't
see nothing going for me in that direction.
Whenever I feel I can't hold up my end of it, that's
when I'll go. If I can't protect the guy I'm with,
there's no need of me being out there.
I hope I got sense enough to leave. Will you
donate this interview to scholarly research at
Texas A&M University? Only if it's to be used as
scholistic material, not to be published or used
in any other manner. But I could publish. Would you
allow me to publish any quotes out of this in a
scholarly book? If I could see them first, sure.
Oh, OK. OK, fine. We're talking about student aid.
So student aid started in 1971. And why did they
start? To act as a buffer between the police
department and the university and to
be seen in uniform, let the university community
know we had students working as police aides. And
since then, it's mushroomed to where we have,
what, 48? 41 aides now. They're our right arm. They
dispatch, and when necessary, They do patrol.
They do routine observation. They take bicycle
theft reports.
They do escort service. Yeah, they do escort
service, which is a very important thing. If we
have anybody that wants an escort home at night
from anywhere on campus, and it seems like it's
damn near anywhere in Berkeley or a mile radius,
they walk them home. Oh, great. And they're the
They don't complain. There's something wrong
with them. They're students. Oh, they don't get
paid? Oh, they get paid, sure. They make better
than the bare wage. I think the bare wage is, what,
$3, $3.35, and they start off at $5, I think. 601,
yeah. And they're pretty intelligent for the most
part. Yeah. They don't take part in an active
felony. No. No confrontation. No arrests or
anything like that. No, no confrontation.
Without them, I don't think we could work. I mean,
we could operate. They've just taken over so many
of the duties that are mean, not, yeah, menial, but
so meaningful. Yes, right. Filing. They are
another reason for the completion of the office.
Oh, yeah. Good to agree. And they run the Bike
Bureau.
Lost and Found. Oh, they're into everything. They
go talk to the new students coming into the dorms.
And why did this come about, this student aid
program? That's one of Beale's programs. Oh, OK.
And started off, I think we had two. They both
worked for me for a long time. I started a bike
bureau. And then Debbie was one. Kent Stewart was
another. John Powell was another. Some of our
aides have went on to become officers here. We have
one officer, one aide that went on. He went
officer, sergeant, and is now a lieutenant.
Hickman. And we have several sergeants that are
aides.
Some of them haven't completed their degrees as
yet. Some of them have.
Thank God we had a hand in bending their little
minds into being good cops, you know. And we're
sought after from everywhere. Our people are
recruited all the time. When we send somebody to an
academy, they're out there recruiting for other
departments. We've lost a few. We've gained a few.
But the aid program per se, it's wonderful. Yeah. A
nice buffer, though, between other students who
have some doubts about the force versus just the
police force who might have doubts about
students. We have people that have never talked to
an officer in their life. They're scared of
police. They've wanted to talk to one. And I guess
every day that goes by, when they're out there in
uniform, somebody new approaches them and just,
can I talk to you for a minute? And they know they're
not cops, but they know they're orientated. We
have a ride-along program for students. I guess
every police department has one. So a student can
just go out to pick people up with you? I mean, is
that what you mean, ride-along? Well, no. I mean,
any student can come to the department and ask to
ride along with a police officer. When did that
start? That sounds like another good idea. That
was a Beale program also. It's easier to tell you
what he didn't do than what he did. The student
aides ride along with the officers, primarily at
night. There's more action. And they man the radio
if the officer gets in trouble. What do you do? What
else do you do? Do you want to ride along? No. What
about uniforms? Do you wear uniforms? Exactly
like ours, except it says aid here. Yeah, they have
a silver badge. It's a shield. And the Hill Patrol
wears, I think, a chicken shit looking uniform.
And... It's not very becoming to them at all. They
think it is.
That sounds like a really super program. It is.
It's great. Is Bill still around? He has retired
and is living his life up at Fort Bragg.
He's went the lecture circuit. He's now writing a
book.
There's a guy who knew a lot about police work. He
knew probably, he taught the FBI what police work
was about. Do you happen to have his address? I'd
like to write to him. Yes, you could write to Chief
William P. Beale, Highway 1. No. B-E-A-L.
B-E-A-L. E. E. What is it called? J. Bill, William
P. Bill.
Greater Highway, Bodega Bay, California. Pardon
me. Not Bodega Bay. Greater Highway? Yeah. Yeah.
Or is that Highway 1? No, it's a greater highway up
there, Fort Bragg.
Or I imagine you could probably call over here, and
they would give you his. I'm sure he has a
forwarding address somewhere.
Yeah. Letty? Well. I should look his name up in a
card catalog, because he might have published.
Well, he's published different things. I don't
know what. I know he's put out manuals. Yeah. He's a
graduate of the University of California. I go
fishing. We go up there, and I spend quite a bit of
time with him while I'm there. And over the years,
we've got to be real good friends.
That isn't what makes me respect and worship him.
Oh, yeah. Oh, I think that would be a start. Yeah.
The
greatest thing since sliced bread. Why did he
retire? He was of age? Time. He got tired. He
was just something else. In
April of 69. Because he was the man that orders the
video equipment and all that stuff. The Second
Department of Helmet County had videotapes. And
so he'd video the demonstrations. Yeah, we'd
video the demonstrations. Yeah, that's another
thing, because everybody started taking
pictures at that time. On one side, they were all
yelling police brutality and taking pictures.
And on the other side, you guys were videotaping. I
would imagine that had to do with court, didn't it?
Oh, yeah. That was primarily what it was for. Or we
could take, we knew a rock thrower. Yeah, right.
And somebody would get hurt, and John would run the
pictures by us, and we'd say, that's him. We'd
circle it. And then we could go to court on it. That
was evidence. Yeah.
Yeah. That's why they took it away from us, I think,
because it was effective. They took it away from
you? Well, they haven't taken it away from us, no.
Not totally. As a matter of fact, the video
equipment, they have increased in the
department. The photo lab, that was closed down.
Well, when? I mean, after the confrontation? I
mean, wasn't there, like, in the 70s sometime? No,
this was just a year ago last July. Oh. A year ago
this first month. But we just used to go out and take
all the photographs, demonstrations, and then
reprocessing the lab. And it'd be, you know, all
sorts of issues.